Views: Write Draft For Introduction (#27618)
TheOdinProject/curriculum: nodeJS/express/views.md

### Introduction

We’ll need a way of rendering the data from our controller functions, and views let us do that. In the context of the MVC architecture, views are the user-facing part of the application. Views are sections of code that generate the HTML for our applications. They define the layout for the rendered HTML and allow data to be rendered where dictated in our layout. In order to display the resulting HTML to the user, views will need to be rendered, typically at the end of controller functions of `GET` requests.

> We use template engines to create our views. More specifically, template engines are used to create template files that transform the template into HTML. Any variables defined in our template files are replaced with actual data. Additionally we can insert logic into our template file, eg. render the user's username once they have logged in. This would not be possible with plain HTML.

Author: Sounds good, your suggestion connects to the curriculum with mention of the views in an earlier project, and is more specific regarding being dynamic. And is clearer regarding how it interacts with request/response cycle.

In this course, we will use [EJS](link: https://ejs.co/) which lets us write in JavaScript to create HTML markup. `EJS`' syntax is very similar to that of HTML, meaning that the learning curve is relatively low compared to other template engines.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this lesson.

- EJS Installation
- EJS Syntax
- Application of EJS

### Setting up EJS

Let's get started with EJS! Install EJS into your application by typing the following into your terminal:

```bash
npm install ejs
```

At the root of your project, create a subfolder called `views`.

Next, we need to let our app know that we intend to use `EJS` as a template engine, as well as where to look for view files.

In your `app.js` file, add the following:

```js

> app.set("views", path, join(__dirname, "views"));

Author: That should be path.join(...), thank you for spotting that!

app.set("view engine", "ejs");
```

This enables `EJS` as the view engine, and that our app should look for templates in the `/views` subdirectory.

### EJS syntax

> In `EJS`, the `<%` and `%>` tags allow us to use JavaScript. Whatever is in these tags will behave like JavaScript. This lets us write conditional statements, `for` loops, as well as use variables.

Reviewer: We can be concise

```suggestion
In EJS, the `<%` and `%>` tags allow us to use JavaScript. This lets us write conditional statements, `for` loops, as well as use variables.
```

> In order to work with variables, we use the `<%=` tag. This lets us convert variables into values when the application is loaded. Otherwise, stick with `<%` when using JavaScript logic.

Reviewer: We need to be more specific on what `<%=` does:
```suggestion
In order to output a variable as a value, we use the `<%=` tag. 
```

Here's a quick example that makes includes arrays and loop logic.

```js
<% const animals = ["Cat", "Dog", "Lemur", "Hawk"] %>

<% animals.map(animal => { %>
- <%= animal%>s are cute <% }) %>
```

### Using EJS with Express

> Let's use `EJS` with `Express`. First, create an `EJS` template file called `index.ejs`, and add the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's use EJS with Express. First, create an EJS template file called `index.ejs` in the `views` subdirectory, and add the following:
```

```html
<html>
  <body>
    <%= message %>
  </body>
</html>
```

And in app.js, render this template file in one of your routes:

```js
app.get("/", (req, res) => {
  res.render("index", { message: "EJS rocks!" });
});
```

> When the `"/"` route is matched, the template file matching `"index"` is rendered with the message value passed, such that you should see:
> 
> ```
> EJS rocks!
> ```

Reviewer: We should explain a bit more on what the code does: 

```suggestion
Start the server and go to the `/` route in the browser. You should see:

```html
EJS rocks!
~~~

If you inspect the HTML in the browser's dev tools, you can see HTML is structures exactly like how we wrote the EJS template with the `message` variable replaced with its value.

When you hit the `/` route, `res.render("index", { message: "EJS rocks!" });`  is the line that sends back the response. Since we've already defined the `views` and `view engine` app properties, the first argument of `res.render` is programmed to look for "a tempalte called index in the specified folder", while the second argument is an object of variables that are to be made available to that specific template.
```

> ### Reusable web components

Reviewer: I'm not sure if calling it 'web components' is the right term. Maybe "Reusable templates?
```suggestion
### Reusable templates
```

Author: Reusable templates is probably better. I chose web components, as I was only thinking about components such as headers, footers, sidebar, etc. But I guess those are only specific applications of templates, so ultimately templates would be the better word to use.

```html
<!-- navbar.ejs -->
<nav>
  <ul>
    <% for (let i = 0; i < links.length; i++) { %>
    <li>
      <a href="<%= links[i].href %>">
        <span> <%= links[i].text %> </span>
      </a>
    </li>
    <% } %>
  </ul>
</nav>
```

You can insert this component into another EJS file like so:

```html
<!-- index.ejs -->
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Homepage</title>
    <body>
      <%- include('navbar', {links: links}) %>
    </body>
  </head>
</html>
```

This can be used to include headers and footers in all of your pages, for example.

Note that the navbar expects a `links` value. To pass this data into the navbar, you can pass it when rendering `index.ejs` which contains the navbar. Modify `app.js` such that a `links` object is defined and passed into the `render` function in the `"/"` route handler:

```js
// app.js
const links = [
  { href: "/", text: "Home" },
  { href: "about", text: "About" },
];

app.get("/", (req, res) => {
  res.render("index", { links: links });
});
```

Here's another example of how to use `includes` to dynamically render a list of variables:

```html
<ul>
  <% users.map( user => { %> <%- include('user/show', {user: user}) %> <% }) %>
</ul>
```

> 

Reviewer: I'm not if learners will know what `user/show` will match since we haven't discussed that there can be subdirectories within the `views` folder. A lesson note would be sufficient.

```suggestion
<div class="lesson-note lesson-note--tip" markdown="1">

#### Directories within the views folder

We can have nested directories of EJS template files within the `views`. For example, to render the template file `./views/user/show.ejs`, we'll need to provide the relative path like so:

```js
// in res.render
res.render("user/show")

// in include
include("user/show")
```

</div>
```

Author: That makes sense that the learner won't be aware of what user/show is, thank you for catching my oversight.

Note the use of the raw output tag `<%-` with the `include` which is used to avoid double-escaping the HTML output.

### Assignment

<div class="lesson-content__panel" markdown="1">

1. A RESOURCE ITEM
   - AN INSTRUCTION ITEM
1. A PRACTICE ITEM
   - A TASK ITEM

> </div>

Reviewer: We should add relevant documentation from the Express site, and a couple of practice assignment items, like: "Add a view for an about page which should render on the `/about` route"

Author: I've just added a few assignment items, including a resource from Express regarding template engines (I've addressed that it uses Pug rather than EJS), and to create and add some components. Sorry for the delay!

### Knowledge check

The following questions are an opportunity to reflect on key topics in this lesson. If you can't answer a question, click on it to review the material, but keep in mind you are not expected to memorize or master this knowledge.

> - [A KNOWLEDGE CHECK QUESTION](A-KNOWLEDGE-CHECK-URL)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

In this course, we will use [EJS](https://ejs.co/). EJS's syntax is very similar to that of HTML, meaning that the learning curve is relatively low compared to other template engines.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this lesson.

- How to setup EJS in an Express project
- How to use EJS 

### Setting up EJS

Let's get started with EJS! Install EJS into your application by typing the following into your terminal:

```bash
npm install ejs
```

At the root of your project, create a subfolder called `views`.

Next, we need to let our app know that we intend to use `EJS` as a template engine, as well as where to look for view files.

In your `app.js` file, set the following application properties:

```javascript
app.set("views", path.join(__dirname, "views"));
app.set("view engine", "ejs");
```

This enables EJS as the view engine, and that our app should look for templates in the `/views` subdirectory.

### EJS syntax

In EJS, the `<%` and `%>` tags allow us to use JavaScript. This lets us write conditional statements, `for` loops, as well as use variables.

> In order to output a variable as a value, we use the `<%=` tag. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to output a variable as a value, we use the `<%=` tag.
```

Here's a quick example that makes includes arrays and loop logic.

```javascript
<% const animals = ["Cat", "Dog", "Lemur", "Hawk"] %>

<% animals.map(animal => { %>
- <%= animal%>s are cute <% }) %>
```

### Using EJS with Express

Let's use EJS with Express. First, create an EJS template file called `index.ejs` in the `views` subdirectory, and add the following:

```html
<html>
  <body>
    <%= message %>
  </body>
</html>
```

And in app.js, render this template file in one of your routes:

```javascript
app.get("/", (req, res) => {
  res.render("index", { message: "EJS rocks!" });
});
```

Start the server and go to the `/` route in the browser. You should see:

```html
EJS rocks!

> ~~~

Reviewer: these should be ` instead of ~

If you inspect the HTML in the browser's dev tools, you can see HTML is structures exactly like how we wrote the EJS template with the `message` variable replaced with its value.

> When you hit the `/` route, `res.render("index", { message: "EJS rocks!" });`  is the line that sends back the response. Since we've already defined the `views` and `view engine` app properties, the first argument of `res.render` is programmed to look for "a tempalte called index in the specified folder", while the second argument is an object of variables that are to be made available to that specific template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you hit the `/` route, `res.render("index", { message: "EJS rocks!" });`  is the line that sends back the response. Since we've already defined the `views` and `view engine` app properties, the first argument of `res.render` is programmed to look for "a template called index in the specified folder", while the second argument is an object of variables that are to be made available to that specific template.
```

### Reusable templates

You may want to include webpage components that are shared across different pages, such as a sidebar or a header. To insert such components into your pages, we make use of the `include` command. This requires the name of the file to be inserted, and optionally an object of data you wish to pass.

Say you have the following navbar component called `"navbar.ejs"`:

```html
<!-- navbar.ejs -->
<nav>
  <ul>

>     <% for (let i = 0; i < links.length; i++) { %>
>     <li>
>       <a href="<%= links[i].href %>">
>         <span> <%= links[i].text %> </span>
>       </a>
>     </li>
>     <% } %>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <% for (let i = 0; i < links.length; i++) { %>
      <li>
        <a href="<%= links[i].href %>">
          <span> <%= links[i].text %> </span>
        </a>
      </li>
    <% } %>
```
We should indent the HTML within the EJS loop

  </ul>
</nav>
```

You can insert this component into another EJS file like so:

```html
<!-- index.ejs -->
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Homepage</title>
    <body>
      <%- include('navbar', {links: links}) %>
    </body>
  </head>
</html>
```

This can be used to include headers and footers in all of your pages, for example.

Note that the navbar expects a `links` value. To pass this data into the navbar, you can pass it when rendering `index.ejs` which contains the navbar. Modify `app.js` such that a `links` object is defined and passed into the `render` function in the `"/"` route handler:

```javascript
// app.js
const links = [
  { href: "/", text: "Home" },
  { href: "about", text: "About" },
];

app.get("/", (req, res) => {
  res.render("index", { links: links });
});
```

Here's another example of how to use `includes` to dynamically render a list of variables:

```html
<ul>
  <% users.map( user => { %> <%- include('user/show', {user: user}) %> <% }) %>
</ul>

> ```

Reviewer: need a blank line after these backticks

<div class="lesson-note lesson-note--tip" markdown="1">

#### Directories within the views folder

> We can have nested directories of EJS template files within the `views`. For example, to render the template file `./views/user/show.ejs`, we'll need to provide the relative path like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can have nested directories of EJS template files within the views. For example, to render the template file `./views/user/show.ejs`, we'll need to provide the relative path like so:
```
Don't think we need backticks for the word "views" in this context.

```javascript
// in res.render
res.render("user/show")

// in include

> include("user/show")

Reviewer: Need to close this codeblock

Say you have the following navbar component called `"navbar.ejs"`:

```html
<!-- navbar.ejs -->
<nav>
  <ul>
    <% for (let i = 0; i < links.length; i++) { %>
      <li>
        <a href="<%= links[i].href %>">
          <span> <%= links[i].text %> </span>
        </a>
      </li>
    <% } %>
  </ul>
</nav>
```

You can insert this component into another EJS file like so:

```html
<!-- index.ejs -->
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Homepage</title>
    <body>
      <%- include('navbar', {links: links}) %>
    </body>
  </head>
</html>
```

This can be used to include headers and footers in all of your pages, for example.

Note that the navbar expects a `links` value. To pass this data into the navbar, you can pass it when rendering `index.ejs` which contains the navbar. Modify `app.js` such that a `links` object is defined and passed into the `render` function in the `"/"` route handler:

```javascript
// app.js
const links = [
  { href: "/", text: "Home" },
  { href: "about", text: "About" },
];

app.get("/", (req, res) => {
  res.render("index", { links: links });
});
```

Here's another example of how to use `includes` to dynamically render a list of variables:

```html

> <ul>
>   <% users.map( user => { %> <%- include('user/show', {user: user}) %> <% }) %>
> </ul>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<ul>
  <% users.forEach((user) => { %>
    <%- include('user/show', {user: user}); %>
  <% }); %>
</ul>
```
This example would be better written as per the [EJS docs `includes` example](https://ejs.co/#:~:text=whitespace%20after%20it-,Includes,-Includes%20are%20relative), just with an arrow function instead.
The split lines is easier to read than multiple `<% %>` in the same line, and switching to `forEach` instead of `map` as we're not using the return value for anything - just including as we iterate over the array.

Looking into how we can get `ejs` syntax highlighting like we do for `erb`, as the markdown preview tool seems to suggest `ejs` is not (yet) supported. If and when we can, then we can use `ejs` instead of `html` for better colours.

Author: Thanks for the suggestions Mao! I'll implement your suggestion, and change any blocks that require the `ejs` tag.

```

<div class="lesson-note lesson-note--tip" markdown="1">

#### Directories within the views folder

We can have nested directories of EJS template files within the views. For example, to render the template file `./views/user/show.ejs`, we'll need to provide the relative path like so:

```javascript
// in res.render
res.render("user/show")

// in include
include("user/show")
```

Note the use of the raw output tag `<%-` with the `include` which is used to avoid double-escaping the HTML output.

### Assignment

<div class="lesson-content__panel" markdown="1">

> 1. Read through the [Express resource on template engines](https://expressjs.com/en/guide/using-template-engines.html). The resource uses Pug for the examples which has a different syntax, however the information should still be a useful supplement to this lesson.

Reviewer: Can we also include an assignment item for the EJS docs?

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, I've just added EJS Docs to Assignment! I thought it wouldn't be necessary because there is already a link to the docs in the introduction, but perhaps learners will benefit from a clear instruction to read it.

2. Add a view for an about page, which should render on the `/about` route.

> 3. Create a reusuable footer component and render it in the `/` route. 

Reviewer 2: Linting errors here will need addressing

Author: I'm not sure what the linting error is, is it regarding the extra space at end of the 3rd line? I'll resolve that but please let me know if there are any other errors.

Reviewer 2: The 3 linting errors for this part at not using [lazy numbering for ordered lists](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/blob/main/LAYOUT_STYLE_GUIDE.md#lazy-numbering) and the trailing space at the end of line 163.

You can see the linting errors as annotations in the `Files changed` tab up top.

> 3. Create a reusuable footer component and render it in the `/` route. 

Reviewer: We could ask learners to render the footer on all routes.
```suggestion
3. Create a reusuable footer template and render it in all of the app routes.
```

</div>

### Knowledge check

The following questions are an opportunity to reflect on key topics in this lesson. If you can't answer a question, click on it to review the material, but keep in mind you are not expected to memorize or master this knowledge.

- [How do you configure EJS for Express projects?](#setting-up-ejs)
- [What is the difference between "<%" and "<%=" tags?](#ejs-syntax)
- [How do you render a view in a controller callback?](#using-ejs-with-express)

> - [How can components be included in other components?](#reusuable-web-components)

Reviewer 2: Will need to address the verbiage and fragment for this KC link.
Should probably use `templates` instead of `components` as well.

Author: Thanks for addressing this, I've just implemented this suggestion.

### Lesson overview

This section contains a general overview of topics that you will learn in this lesson.

- How to setup EJS in an Express project
- How to use EJS

### Setting up EJS

Let's get started with EJS! Install EJS into your application by typing the following into your terminal:

```bash
npm install ejs
```

At the root of your project, create a subfolder called `views`.

Next, we need to let our app know that we intend to use `EJS` as a template engine, as well as where to look for view files.

In your `app.js` file, set the following application properties:

```javascript
app.set("views", path.join(__dirname, "views"));
app.set("view engine", "ejs");
```

This enables EJS as the view engine, and that our app should look for templates in the `/views` subdirectory.

### EJS syntax

In EJS, the `<%` and `%>` tags allow us to use JavaScript. This lets us write conditional statements, `for` loops, as well as use variables.

In order to output a variable as a value, we use the `<%=` tag.

Here's a quick example that includes arrays and loop logic.

```ejs

> <% const animals = ["Cat", "Dog", "Lemur", "Hawk"] %>
> 
> <% animals.map(animal => { %>
> - <%= animal%>s are cute <% }) %>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<% const animals = ["Cat", "Dog", "Lemur", "Hawk"] %>

<ul>
  <% animals.map((animal) => { %>
    <li><%= animal %>s are cute</li>
  <% }) %>
</ul>
```
Suggestion - just to put loops into context (ul/li).
I think we should at the very least format the JS parts on different lines e.g.

```ejs
<% animals.map((animal) => { %>
  <%= animal %>s are cute
<% }) %>
```

];

app.get("/", (req, res) => {
  res.render("index", { links: links });
});
```

Here's another example of how to use `includes` to dynamically render a list of variables:

```ejs
<ul>
  <% users.forEach((user) => { %>
    <%- include('user/show', {user: user}); %>
  <% }); %>
</ul>
```

<div class="lesson-note lesson-note--tip" markdown="1">

#### Directories within the views folder

We can have nested directories of EJS template files within the views. For example, to render the template file `./views/user/show.ejs`, we'll need to provide the relative path like so:

```javascript
// in res.render
res.render("user/show")

// in include
include("user/show")
```

Note the use of the raw output tag `<%-` with the `include` which is used to avoid double-escaping the HTML output.

### Serving Static Assets

Serving static assets with EJS is similar to how we served assets previously when working directly with HTML, in that we can add external files to the head of the template file using the `link` tag. The main thing to point out is that the app needs to know where to serve assets from. Assuming `express` is installed, set the following lines in `app.js`:

```javascript

> app.use(express.static(path,join(__dirname, "public")));

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
app.use(express.static(path.join(__dirname, "public")));
```

```

> `Express.static()` is a middleware function that enables the use of static assets, and we tell it to look for assets with the `public` directory as the root.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`express.static()` is a middleware function that enables the use of static assets, and we tell it to look for assets with the `public` directory as the root.
```

Say we have the following `styles.css` file in the root of the `public` directory:
```css
body {
  color: red;
}
```

To serve `styles.css` in `index.ejs`, set the following `link` tag like so in the head:
```ejs
<head>

>   <link rel="stylesheet" href:"./styles.css">

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="./styles.css">
```

    </body>
  </head>
</html>
```

This can be used to include headers and footers in all of your pages, for example.

Note that the navbar expects a `links` value. To pass this data into the navbar, you can pass it when rendering `index.ejs` which contains the navbar. Modify `app.js` such that a `links` object is defined and passed into the `render` function in the `"/"` route handler:

```javascript
// app.js
const links = [
  { href: "/", text: "Home" },
  { href: "about", text: "About" },
];

app.get("/", (req, res) => {
  res.render("index", { links: links });
});
```

Here's another example of how to use `includes` to dynamically render a list of variables:

```ejs
<ul>
  <% users.forEach((user) => { %>
    <%- include('user/show', {user: user}); %>
  <% }); %>
</ul>
```

<div class="lesson-note lesson-note--tip" markdown="1">

#### Directories within the views folder

We can have nested directories of EJS template files within the views. For example, to render the template file `./views/user/show.ejs`, we'll need to provide the relative path like so:

```javascript
// in res.render
res.render("user/show");

// in include
include("user/show");

> ```

Reviewer: we missed the closing `div` tag for this.

![image](https://github.com/TheOdinProject/curriculum/assets/85733202/ab53767d-de22-4b69-8ad0-f6d24cf24d43)

can you add it please

Author: Thanks for spotting that, I've added a closing div tag just above Serving Static Assets. Let me know if that's correct or if it was needed somewhere else.
